Russell Lewis  0:00  
Sometimes when I lecture. Okay, so why is this important? Because there's certain drugs that are concentration dependent and we maximize peak mic, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, Polymyxin and so if we're dealing with higher mics, when we want to maximize activity, if we can, we'll give a singer higher dose, there are drugs that are time dependent, penicillin, cephalosporins, carbapenems, monobactems, macrolides. And so the goal is to optimize the duration of exposure time above mic. And then in the middle, you have drugs that have a mixture of both time and concentration dependence. And those are the area under the curve, the mic, drugs. But the advantage of knowing this now is that we can you can go back and study antibiotics, or you can study the drugs in both in animals and in patients, and you can begin then to understand, how can I individualize the dosing of an antibiotic with mathematical models. So I just want to show you an example. And this is something that pretty much is starting to become available on your phone. And I'm not saying you're going to use this now, it used to be just people like me that would do modeling to demonstrate this, but because we understand the pharmacodynamics. Now we can do individualized dosing for antibiotics and especially in critically ill patients. This can be life saving. So this is a let's imagine we have a 35 year old patient, 70 kilos, 170 centimeters, admitted to the hospital after a motor vehicle accident, and he's becoming hypotensive, and they're worried that he needs antibiotics. So we start neuropenem, a broad spectrum gram negative agent. Okay, if we're talking about a typical infusion of the drug at the typical dose, one gram infused over 30 minutes, every eight hours. That's the license dose. That's the dose that if you read the package insert, if you look at a reference, it'll say, this is the dose of muropino, and he's a typical patient. This dotted line is the mic, the typical mic breakpoint for E coli, for example, and Mi c of two. What you'll see is that we would predict, based on just analysis of hundreds of patients, maybe even 1000s of patients who have gotten the dose 35 year olds like him, we would predict a concentration profile that looks like this, a peak of around 50 and probably stay time above mic for at least more than 40 50% of the dosing interval. And that's pretty good, because it's been shown in animal studies and also in clinical studies, that if you can stay the time above mic at least 40 to 50% then it should be efficacious. So this is the prediction, where is our patient probably going to fall out based on his clinical characteristics, he might actually be doing even better. Okay, he may even be 93% time above mic. And how are we doing this estimation? This is an estimation. It's based on mathematical models. Basically they go in and studied the pharmacokinetics of neuropem patients in the ICU. Remember, we said many antibiotics, we only learned about the pharmacokinetics and critically ill patients afterwards. So they went in and studied the pharmacokinetics of neuropemone in the ICU. And what they found, and this is basically, here's the model right here, what they found is that there are certain clinical factors that will affect the patient's exposure, their kidney function, their weight. There may be other factors. Are they on dialysis? For example, their creatinine, obviously creatinine clearance. They save albumin because it affects protein binding. It affects the amount of free drug that's available for clearance. So he has an albumin of 2.8 he may have higher free drug exposures, his rate of diuresis, etc. Okay, yeah, so this

Russell Lewis  4:16  
is, this is, this isn't a real, this is, like a real clinical case, okay, under the curve.

Russell Lewis  4:31  
So what I want to know, for example. So if I have this patient here, and the dosing, he's getting one gram, 50 minute, half an hour infusion, or every eight hours. Okay, so let's give him 234, dosages, okay, and we can predict what this would look like, okay, and we can make a calculation that says he is probably okay with a standard dose, provided we're treating a very susceptible pathogen, mic of two, because the time above mic is 93% Yeah. How much to give at a low

Russell Lewis  5:18  
concentration, but what he's doing is making a prediction, because they've gone and studied hundreds, not 1000s, of patients who received the article and said, when we mathematically describe the pharmacokinetics of the drug, the volume distribution, the clearance, the kind of moment, what affects the pharmacodynamics, these are The four most important clinical factors. Now it could be that this model is not applicable to your patient. What if your patient was a burn patient, there's probably other things that affect what if the patient's on dialysis, there's going to be other things. So that's one of the first points, that is the model applicable to your patient. But now what we're trying to do is we're trying to say, you know, can we with the first dose, just considering just clinical factors, look at the probability that we're giving it a good dose. It's not that we're saying, Just give the same dose to everybody and we hope for the best. We want to know, are we probably giving a good dose to this patient, or are we falling into the trap that I mentioned yesterday, more than 1/3 of the patients were under doses. Okay. Now the reason I wanted to show this to you is just to demonstrate, and by the way, on the pod of ID, there's a link to this so you can play with it yourself. I suggest it's just one way to help you understand the concepts. Okay? So this is great. And actually the model, one of the nice things about model is it shows variability too. It can tell you probability based on how much variation, because I could give everyone the same dose of an antibiotic, and you guys are young, healthy. You look healthy to me, proud. Variation. In the volume of distribution, the variation in the clearance, the variation in the time above mic, would still be what we call a coefficient of variation of 20 30% some of you are going to have very high levels. Some of you are going to have potentially low levels. For some strange reason. I don't know what you ate this morning. I don't know. Maybe it's something you need to learn about. Special metabolism. Okay, we would hope, if there was very little variation from one person to the next, then maybe we could get by with using the same dose and everything. But the problem is, when you're dealing with somebody who's in a motor vehicle accident and sepsis, and you look at the pharmacokinetics of antibiotics, the coefficient of variation, blues to 80% 90% 100% it's very difficult to predict what the exposure will be based on the dose that you get. Okay, so the model is helping you try to synthesize that. Okay, here's the clinical factors that we know affect the volume, distribution and clearance of the drug, and will affect, therefore, the antimicrobial efficacy. So we can make a prediction. Now, whenever you have a model, you'd like to validate that prediction. So what would we do to really make sure that this model is correct? We would like to do a blood level and check does it fall the blood level of neuropemone? Is it consistent with what the model said it would be, or is it below, or is it above? And if the blood level that's taken a mirror penum differs, then we can the model can be adjusted based on that blood level. And we did, then we end up with a dosing specific model for our patient, okay, but let's show this. Let's take this a couple steps forward. So we said that we were giving this one gram every eight hours, and this was doing fine, as long as the patient was basically getting has has a susceptible pathogen, okay, but what if the mic was not to this is the TDM measurement. Where is the mic patient? There's a place for mic here somewhere. And we, when we start out, we may not know the mic. We may start out by just putting this is what's usually reported by the laboratory as the break point. Okay. But then after 2448 hours, 72 hours, we may have an mic. And let's say the mic is actually 16. Now the mic is not down here. Now here look at our dosing regimen, and here's our mic. Now look at our time above mic 18, 20% that is clearly below the minimum target need for ethics. So can you treat an mic of 16 with neurofeed? Okay? Well, we could say, let's go ahead and increase the dose, right? So we said we were giving one gram, 30 minute infusion every eight hours. Let's change this to two grams. So if I give two grams, I can do a couple dosages. Will that do? Will that help? Well, you can see the time above mic has improved a little bit, a little bit, and it's now maybe up to the bare minimum by giving just doubling the dose. But now here we have a problem. Look at these high peaks, and typically peaks around when they as they approach 100 is where you begin to see seizure. So we doubled the dose. We're achieving high peaks, but we're not achieving that much better time above MIT. In fact, most of the drug, I could argue to you, is being peed out into the bag. It's not going it's not treating the infection. Okay? So this is where knowledge of the pharmacodynamics becomes important. Time dependent antibiotic I want to improve time above mic. What about giving an extended infusion? So what about instead of giving it as a 30 minute infusion, I can give it as a seven and a half hour infusion. Now why seven and a half hours? Some antibiotics are stable in a bag. You can put the single daily dose in a bag and run it as a continuous infusion. Other antibiotics are not stable. Neuropemone has to be changed every eight hours. So I'm going to put, I'm going to take the dose that we would have in the previously given over 30 minutes, and now I'm going to say, No, I want you to infuse this over seven and a half hours instead of doing a 30 minute infusion. Now look what's happened. Okay? Now in this patient, we're still not, we're still not quite there, seven and a half hours, eight hour in. Oh, wait, sorry, no, I did this wrong. The duration, seven half hour interval, every eight hours. Yeah. And what you can see is, in this individual patient, we're now staying above the mic. Time above mic, 90% 100% so that's just a simple thing. Changing the infusion duration is maximizing the pharma dynamics of the beta lactam. So on the part of ID site, there's this website that you can it's you can just go in and play with it and look at this, and also look at another class of antibiotics, like the Neo glycosides, which are concentration dependent. And see what happens when you change dosing regimens. You see what it also allows me to do. What this model allows me to do is ask, what if questions, right? Instead of just taking the dose and assuming the patient, what if my patient got double the dose, would that improve things? What if the patient's renal function is declining? What if the patient's renal function is serum creatinine is now 1.8 because he's has declining renal function. How is this going to change? That's the album creatinine, yeah. How's this going to change the clearance actually, declining renal function is good for antibiotic exposure, but it's still pretty safe. We're doing even better. We're now completely 100% time above my C so it's showing you the estimates of all the pharmacokinetics and the clearance and a pkpd target. And the idea is you can start out with a empirical model, using evidence from 1000s of previous treated patients, use a mathematical model, put in the dose, the clinical characteristics of the patient. Come up with a dose that has what you think will be a high probability of success. Then, as you get information, you might see the pathogen therapeutic drug monitoring available, putting into drug concentrations, adjust the model specifically to the patient's dosing, and come up with dosages. And then if the patient

Russell Lewis  14:28  
has problems with changes in their clearance, renal function, whatever you can put this in, adjust the model. So this is a this is where we're going with antibiotic dosing. Okay, are we there yet? Not entirely. Most of your colleagues are not going to be doing this. You're going to be picking the same dose, giving it to all patients, adjusting it for renal function, hopefully not the first dose. But you can also do this on a unit level. You can, you can kind of come up with say, Okay, we're going to in critically ill patients. We're going to give the drugs by continuous infusion from the very beginning. Okay, you can try to make some general approaches to improve the outcomes. So take a look at it. It's also interesting to see, for example, how it might affect it, because some drugs like imglycosides, the problem is toxicity, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, and the toxicity is not driven by the high peaks. It's driven by persistent troughs, if you have concentrations that remain residual concentrations, and how do you adjust that? So it's another approach to not only considering the pharmacokinetics, but also considering that pharmacodynamics is a time dependent concentration, dependent drug, and optimizing the dosing. A couple of other points to make is that there are some sites of infection where drugs may not work, simply do not work. Daptomycin is an amazing drug for MRSA, very rapidly societal antibiotic, one of our most important drugs in methicillin resistant staph aureus. Interestingly, daptomycin was originally developed by a company called Eli Lilly in the 1980s and they were giving it three times a day, and it looked incredible. And then they got to the phase two clinical trials, and people started developing rhabdomyolysis, damage of the muscle and leading to renal failure. So they had to abandon the drug, even though it looked very promising. And this small biotech company in Boston looked at the drug after myosin, and they said, well, what's the pharmacodynamics? And they actually found it's a concentration dependent killing agent, and you don't need to give it three times a day. You can give a single dose once a day, and it kills better. And they found out that the rhabdomyolysis was due to persistent trough concentrations. So if you give it three times a day, you maximize the possibility of having high troughs and rhabdomyolysis. You give it once a day, to improve killing and reduce the risk of rhabdomyolysis. So just by applying pharmatic knowledge, they took a drug antibiotic that was abandoned and brought it to market, and it was made billions of dollars. Okay, but there's one problem with deptamycin. When it goes into the lung, it's bound to surfactant in the lung. It's not active in the lung for treating pneumonia, so even though it works very well in bloodstream, in tissue, bone, doesn't work in the lung to treat Staph aureus pneumonia, because it's bound to surfactant. This was actually learned the hard way in a clinical trial, and they went back and studied and found out also placing certain environments, like abscesses, may bind antibiotics, they may have low oxygen tension. Drugs like aminoglycosides have to be taken up by active processes into bacterial cells and low oxygen tension, many antibiotics and penicillins and tetracyclines are less effective, so this is why we always talk about the treatment of many infections. Is there a problem with source control? Do you have an abscess or large hematoma that needs to be evacuated because antibiotics will not be as active in some of these sites? Okay, principle seven. Remember, there's only 10 Principles. And then we'll finish with a couple of myths about antibiotic therapy. One is that once you have your antimicrobial data, your mics, the identification, you can de escalate antibiotic therapy based on the microbiology results and clinical biomarker responses. So if you started out with broad spectrum therapy, and now you know it's a susceptible pathogen, you can switch to that susceptible pathogen safely, to the single drug, narrower spectrum drug safely. If, for example, you were worried that the patient had methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus. One of the common things I see is patients who are on vancomycin for weeks and weeks and weeks and then, why are we? Why is the patient still on vancomycin? Well, we suspected Staphylococcus aureus two weeks ago. Okay. Staphylococcus aureus and bloodstream patients are sick, and blood cultures will become positive if they haven't become positive in two weeks, you probably do not need to treat it. Okay? So you can consider stopping vancomycin. So we try to get people to deescalate antibiotic therapy based focusing on the narrowest spectrum agent that's effective, because we don't want this collateral damage to the microbiome, which increases the risk of problems like Clostridium difficile colitis or antibiotic associated colitis. So this this spore forming bacteria that produces toxin. When you give broad spectrum antibiotic therapy, it creates a niche for this bacteria to grow produce toxin that can cause very severe colitis and can be life threatening. So we want to try to avoid and reduce that risk, and remember 3% increase of risk of side effects the longer you continue antibiotic therapy. So what do we look for that the patient's responding? The most classic biomarkers, of course, are fever and leukocytosis, and usually patients should begin to have their fever and leukocyte count respond within 48 hours. For most infections, there's going to be exceptions to this, but you should begin within 48 hours to see some response. 48 to 72 hours in some cases, though, if the patient doesn't have response, then you're going to see, we're going to have to start thinking about why. Why might is it resistance? Is it a problem with a source control issue? Does the patient have an infected catheter? Do we have the wrong diagnosis? We're going to have to think about those things. So we try to, with de escalation, get people off vancomycin if they haven't been growing Staph aureus, so if they only have gram negative bacilli and blood cultures, stop the empirical vancomycin. Stop the broad spectrum antimicrobials, if for resistant pathogens, if they don't have highly resistant pathogens grown from culture and some there's some other tests that there's different debate about how effective they are for controlling antibiotic therapy, C reactive protein, obviously, this is a test that is general inflammation. Some people are very big believers in it. You certainly do see patterns of increasing C reactive protein with bacterial infection like gram negative sepsis, and decreasing with response to therapy. But it's a non specific marker, and some have said that the only reason to order a C reactive protein is to make sure the laboratory is open. Pro calcitonin is another one that's debated a lot because this is a biomarker that arises with response to especially gram negative sepsis and bacterial infections. And it has been shown in a number of studies that if a patient does have response to procalcitonin decreases while on antibiotic therapy, then you can this can be a psychological tool or crutch or a biomarker that's useful for reaching an endpoint

Russell Lewis  22:27  
for stopping antimicrobial therapy. So it's a test that what I've found is certainly a negative pro calcitonin. What we'd like to hope is that people would say, Okay, I'm not dealing with, for example, infection. I can withdraw antibiotics. A pro positive pro calcitonin is a suggestive sign of acute bacterial infection. But what I often see is people ignore the negatives and only focus on the positives, so they don't stop the antibiotics. If they get a negative procalcitonin, bad test, if they get a positive pro calcitonin, and they say, See, I told you the patient needed antibiotics. So it's a test that needs its own stewardship and control and probably guidelines for appropriate use. The identification of pathogens is important, not only in terms of you'll have the initial Gram stain, and of course, you remember the Gram stain is the key issue of selecting anabolic therapy. Are we doing the gram positive or gram negative infection? So that immediately allows you to reduce the spectrum of therapy. So if you're growing a gram negative do you need the gram positive therapy? Maybe not. And it's been shown that doing gram stains and trying to get cultures and identification of pathogens does result in more appropriate antimicrobial therapy and shorter courses of antibiotic therapy. This is a recent study published in JAMA from a Japanese group that showed that patients they had higher rates of appropriate de escalation of antibiotic especially methicillin resistant staph aureus therapy, vancomycin, but also higher rates of appropriate escalation. Patients will put on broader spectrum agents more frequently, more appropriately, by doing Gram stain and culture. So we always want to get the culture and susceptibility testing, if available. Now, I feel like I have to say something about susceptibility testing, because many of your colleagues are going to look at a report for susceptibility testing and say, if it has an s next to it, it means I can use it. S susceptible, perfect. If they see an R, they know resistant, I can't use it, okay, but it's not always so simple, and especially when you're dealing with resistant pathogens. So this is a blood culture of a KPC carbapenemase producing Klebsiella pneumonia, and we three, we see three susceptibles here, SSS, ceftazini, Ava backdem. This is a third generation cephalosporin plus an inhibitor of carbapenemase. So this is a drug that came onto the market about six years ago that, thank God, came onto the market, because now we had a treatment for KPC carbapenemase, but I would also see colistin and amikacin, and these are both susceptible. But I see something very important here. Now, they did this testing in broth these three drugs, probably because it wasn't part of the standardized microbiology panel, but I see something very interesting here they are telling you that the mic is less than one, and the break point of where we define resistance for Ceftazidime Ava Bam is eight. That's a good sign when the breakpoint is two or three to four dilutions higher than the mic that's measured in the lab. That gives you some confidence that ceftacity vivactin is a potent drug, but in the case of colistin, what I see is that the breakpoint, the mic one, is within one dilution of the break point two or above is resistant. Actually above two is resistant. Two is the break point. So there's only about a dilution, two dilution difference between what the laboratory would call resistant versus what they would tell you is susceptible. And guess what? The error of the mic test is if you perform it 10 times plus or minus one dilution. So if you perform this test 10 times, you can just as easily come up with two, maybe even four as 0.5 results. Okay, that's something they don't tell you. There's another problem with looking at these drugs too colistin, I know from clinical studies, is a much worse option, routinely has much higher failure rates. It's a nephrotoxic drug. Actually, it was used in the 1970s taken off, basically put on the shelf because it was too toxic, neurotoxicity, motor toxicity, less effective, doesn't penetrate the lung, has high rates of spontaneous resistance. Okay, so I wouldn't even report colistin unless we absolutely had to do it. So I don't think the microbiology laboratory should be reporting that amication, by itself, is not going to be an effective therapy. And I don't know the actual mic, okay, so to me, s doesn't mean s, obviously the resistance. Now, one of the other things, interestingly, if you look up here in this corner, they also report mics for some other drugs, Mi c of tidocycline two, but then he forgot to tell you whether it's s or R. What do you do with that? You ignore it because tidocycline is in tetracycline. Has a very high volume in distribution. This pathogen is in the patient's blood. You will not achieve concentrations above two to treat this pathogen, so hopefully they're not going to use or at least use it by itself. They also reported a couple of other experiment, recently approved drug, imipenem. This is an older carbapenem plus relibactin, which is the carbapenemase inhibitor. And they say 0.19 0.32 sensitive. Okay. Question is, what's the break point? Probably the break point is higher. So these might be options that you could consider using. And then you see this other thing. This is interesting. KB, what is that? Kirby Bauer, disk, cele, this is a new cephalosporin. It's a mimicker of basically. It's taken up by bacteria as an iron siderophor, so it sort of sneaks into the bacteria as a Trojan horse. It's resistant to some carbapenemases, and they report you a zone diameter of 22 millimeters, and they say it's susceptible. And I know just from the literature that there's lots of problems with testing a cepheder call. So it's interesting that they tested it by different method. And I actually went and looked at the documents. 22 millimeters is in a region where it's indeterminate what the result is, and you could just as easily call this resistance. So the point I can to you is s i, which intermediate R doesn't tell the story alone, right? Okay, obviously, usually, the other thing they say on this report is consult an infectious disease specialist. And an infectious disease specialist is going to say, clearly, Ceftazidime, avid backtam, here is the best choice, maybe in combination with The amikacin for the first two or three days until the patient clears the bloodstream. We can consider some of these other agents. I would not use, cephedericol, okay, but you can see I'm not looking at just si and R. I'm thinking about the pharmacokinetics. I'm thinking about how the limitations of an Mic test potentially think about what site of infection I'm treating and not just relying on S and R, because that's that does not give you enough information. One of the ways you can do stewardship, by the way, is to get the laboratory to report only very specific things. So that's one way we try to guide antibiotic selection and dosing behavior, is by through the antimicrobial report. So microbiologists play a very important role in this. Now, if the antibiotics not working, what should you do? We have to consider source control or an alternative diagnosis before assuming resistance and broadening therapy. So if the fever curve is not decreasing or changing, the white blood cell count remains elevated. If they had purulent secretions, they're still persisting. They still have signs of inflammation, rubric, tumor dolore, color, for example,

Russell Lewis  31:04  
if you're treating a cellulitis, you can take a pen and draw a line around the cellulitis, and you come back and see them in the afternoon the next day, is it receding from the line? Is it advancing across the line? Are the biomarkers improving? Then you may have to consider empirically changing antibiotics. And more critically ill, the patient is more delicate, the patient is you may be much more aggressive about this. If a patient's relatively stable, if they're not hypotensive, they're not that ill, you may be able to have a decision of continuing therapy for another day or two. But the question is, what are the things that typically lead to antibiotic failure? So if you have abscesses, so occult abscesses, for example, in cellulitis, these need to be drained. Antibiotic therapy is not going to penetrate into an abscess. You need to drain this to have response to therapy. And in fact, in many types of cellulitis, the most important intervention, it's been argued, is not the antibiotic therapy. It's actually the surgical intervention for the infection. You may have had a patient with an intra abdominal infection, they initially respond, and then they have recurrent fevers, and so you're going to have to consider how they form intra abdominal abscesses, intraperitoneal abscess, you have to take them to imaging and look to see is there a potential source for recurrent fever that requires draining empyemas and community acquired pneumonia that may require a chest tube to drain loculated pleural effusions that can't be penetrated or cleared out with antibiotics. We talked about the spondylomyelitis a patient. Have they seeded another site? They have osteomyelitis. And of course, you're very concerned about, does the patient have prosthetic materials? Does the patient have, for example, a central venous catheter? When you insert a catheter, there's two potential times of infection. At the time of insertion, when you're going to have the catheter become infected externally or around the hub, and potentially seating secondary seating. The patient had an infection and it was seated, the catheter then becomes seeded hematogenously, usually inside the lumen. The problem is, once a catheter becomes seeded, bacteria form what's called biofilm community, a glycopolysaccharide matrix, a goo that covers the bacteria, protects it from immune cells, protects it from penetration of antibiotics actually causes it's a community of bacteria, and as you go deeper into the biofilm, the bacteria are less metabolically active. They sort of become a dormant zombie state. So even if you give beta lactams, they're not rapidly growing, they're not rapidly dividing, the antibiotic doesn't work. The problem is, over time, pieces of this biofilm break off and see and cause recurrence. So what can you do to get rid of this biofilm? Can you try to burn it out with an antibiotic? Sometimes we try that. We put antibiotics into the catheter, lock it and see if that can control it. Usually all that does is reduce the inoculum. Sometimes we even tried ethanol, okay. But the problem is this, if it's a virulent pathogen, you have to remove the catheter. So if it's Staph aureus, you're not going to sit there and play around with the catheter. You're going to have to remove it, because the patient's going to see their bones, their heart valves, other sites. It can be very nasty infection, if it's Candida albicans and yeast, if it's pseudomonas, you're going to remove the catheter whenever possible, okay, as soon as possible. Otherwise, there's going to be very high risk of relapse and recurrent infection. When do we try to manage the infection with the catheter in situ, when it's a low virulent organism like coagulase, negative staphylococcus? Very common scenario, somebody has an implanted catheter. Maybe they get chemotherapy intermittently. They go in to the hospital. The catheters flush. Also, they get this little spruce of the coagulase negative staph in the bloodstream. They have a little fever, little riders. Maybe the blood cultures are positive, maybe they're not. And if the blood cultures are positive for quite a negative staph, you can say, okay, they probably have this sort of chronic catheter infection, quite nice negative staph. Can we do lock therapy? Can we do something to salvage the catheter before we have to remove that's only done with low virulence organisms and ultimately fails. It's never curative, okay, but you can reduce the amount. You know, if you need to use the catheter, you can't it can't be replaced. Maybe it's implanted. Sometimes we do try to salvage catheters, but generally, if it's a high virulence organism, it needs to come out. The risk is too high for to keep the catheter inside you. So if we ever discover therapies that are effective against biofilm, it's going to have a tremendous impact on the treatment of infectious disease and recurrent infectious disease, because this is the problem, not only with catheters, but also urinary catheters, prosthetic materials, prosthetic knees, prosthetic hips, prosthetic heart valves, grafts, AV grafts. We always worry the patient had bacteremia, and they have some kind of prosthetic material, is there a potential that they've seeded this prosthetic material and they're now going to have this chronic, potentially relapsing infection, and then the question is, going to be okay? What do you do about this? If it's a joint replacement? May have to do several different interventions to try to replace a joint because of infection. If it's something that can't be replaced, you may have to try chronic suppressive therapy, but this is a big, big issue, and it's often the cause of recurrent infectious infections in patients who've had bacteremia. Okay, so that's the problem of the localized process, abscess, prosthetic, material, catheter, something is still a source for the infection that antibiotics alone can't treat. It needs surgery. It needs source control, removal of the item. But there's other things doing is back, is the bacterial infection, or whatever we're thinking might be caused the infection, the only cause the infection, maybe we have the wrong diagnosis. Maybe the patient has multiple infections, so we have to restart our diagnostic approach. If the patient has persisted fever, we may have to order more radiographic tests, more blood cultures, consider, go back and think about the history again, that we missed something in the history. And does this suggest that we're missing something that could be a cause of an occult infection that is harder to diagnose. The problem is, once you start on the road with antibiotics, your diagnostic recovery, your diagnostic the probability you're going to make diagnosis begins to decrease, until sometimes you reach a point where you have a patient, if they're stable, you just stop all antibiotic therapy. You say, we have to let the infection redeclare itself, because we're not finding any source. We're not finding any cultures. We're not finding any obvious signs or symptoms, and you know, we're not going to make a diagnosis. So we can't keep the patient on antibiotics forever. And if you put patients on antibiotics, they can develop allergies to antibiotics. You can develop as the longer you take antibiotics, the longer more antibiotics you take, there's a possibility of antibiotic associated fever, especially a patient who's clinically stable, who has low grade fever, or any patient, of course, who develops rash on antibiotic therapy, sometimes it's accompanied with fever. This could be caused by the antibiotics. So you have to pick an antibiotic to stop very common situation when I was on hematology oncology, you know, of course, they have protocols. They start antibiotics, and you get a call and said, Okay, we have the patient on these four antibiotics. We've cultured nothing. We have no radiographic diagnosis. What should we do with the antibiotics we have no diagnostic information. And then the question is, could this be antibiotic associated fever? So we have to pick, maybe start picking antibiotics. Sometimes the fever is caused by non infectious diseases, right? Malignancy, part of their underlying disease, inflammation. So fail is sort of a use, useful construct, fail. Why is my patient failing? False diagnosis, allergies, intercurrent, infections, localized process. What are we missing? So the new onset of infectious signs and symptoms and biomarkers after resolution is a concern, and you should really definitely think about, could this patient have a new pathogen or new infection, and it's reasonable to broaden therapy to cover the potential breakthrough or resistant pathogen, because this is also the problem that as the patient stays on antibiotics therapy longer, that the specter of resistance begins To increase, and we may now be dealing with resistant, breakthrough pathogens.

Russell Lewis  40:47  
Now, when I was going through my training, I was told you always have to treat this infection for seven days. You always have to treat this infection for 14 days. This infection needs to be treated for 21 days. This infection needs to be treated for six weeks. I never questioned that, because I was being told by a genius or a professor or whatever on rounds, and the fact that it always fit neatly into seven days, 14 days, Constantine units, okay, and it was all really just, it wasn't based on evidence, because antibiotics came on to the market and it was so obvious that they were very effective treatments. There was never some of the clinical trials done to establish what's the minimum duration of therapy. So people recognizing that the long you stay on antibiotics, the greater potential of resistance and that maybe we're over treating many infections. People have begun to go back over the last decade and said, What is the minimum duration of therapy that's needed for treating many of these infections? And now the mantra is, shorter is better. Shorter is better. Yet, I do see still the messages on the TV, for example, always take all of your antibiotics. Okay, yes, that's true. But also we're now seeing that once the patient's better, it's better sometimes that they stop antibiotics. The question is, we want to make sure that's evidence based in that decision. But look at, for example, bacteremia, gram negative. We would have never treated it less than two weeks, I was told that they're going to have a higher risk of recurrence. Patients going to have a higher mortality rate, they're going to have more complications. Now there's number of studies have shown a seven day course, if the patient clinically responds, the fever goes down, the biomarkers respond, they're not hypotensive. Seven days is enough. Chronic bronchitis, less than five days intra abdominal infection. Now, four days. Osteomyelitis, typically a thing in retreat for at least six weeks. Now, many of these therapies are becoming shorter. So now the mantra is, shorter is better, and it's not necessarily for all infections, but for infections where we have evidence, good evidence from clinical trials, we now treat for shorter periods, and it's been shown actually, if you say, well, is the mortality rate the same or is it worse, all these studies for all these indications I'm showing you here have shown equivalent mortality, and in some cases, lower mortality with the shorter regimen. Why? Because there's fewer resistant infections that break through. Okay, let's finish with a couple common myths. Myth one, bacterial antibiotics are more effective than bacterial effective than bacteriostatic bactericidal it kills. Bacterial static, it doesn't kill. It just inhibits growth. These are laboratory definitions. All antibiotics kill. They kill at different rates and at different inoculums. It's defined, usually in the laboratory, as if the concentration needed to prevent growth. Once you transfer, if you take an mic tray, you have a clear well, which is the mic the inhibitory concentration, and you plate it on auger. If there's colonies that grow, it's static. It didn't kill. There's still organisms growing, okay. But the reality is, it did kill. It reduced the innocuous just didn't reduce the inoculum above below a threshold of 1000 okay, but it did kill in 24 hours versus a bactericidal agent. It reduced it more than 1000 within 24 hours. Okay. It's sort of an artificial construct, but I was taught forever there's certain infections you always have to use bactericidal antibiotics versus bacteriostatic. There have been a number of randomized controlled trials identified 49 to 56 found no difference in clinical outcomes, including highly lethal infections, between bacteriostatic versus bactericidal agents. So basically, I think that this is something that you're still going to hear we need to use this drug because it's bacterialcidal. But in the back of your mind, know that it's a myth. Basically, it's something that has been propagated. It's been taught in medical schools for decades, and the evidence behind that there's a difference in clinical outcomes is extremely thin, so it's going to take time for that to change. There's other examples. I mentioned daptomycin. It's a bacterial cytal agent. I said, bactericidal. I'm part of the problem. Okay. It is bactericidal. It looks great. We always complain about vancomycin. It's a slow killing agent. Doesn't look great. Everybody was absolutely convinced that once daptomycin was compared to vancomycin in a clinical trial for a serious infection like staph aureus bacteremia, there would be a huge difference favoring daptomycin. Turns out, okay, vancomycin is a little bit more toxic, but in all the all the studies that have tried to show superiority of bactericidal activity have not shown this. So I think it's something that we need to recognize is not based in evidence right now. Myth number two, besides being taught that I had to treat certain infections for a certain period of time, 721, six weeks, days, six weeks, I was taught you always have to use IV therapy for this type of infection, osteomyelitis, bone infections, which is a problem six weeks of therapy. Patient has to stay in the hospital for six weeks. Infectious disease, hospitals full of patients receiving IV therapy or osteomyelitis, okay? Why can't you use oral if the patient's absorbing it, if you have an antibiotic with good bioavailability, the bacteria doesn't know the difference how the antibiotic got there. So people, it's already go back now, in addition to shorter courses of antibiotic therapy, shorter is better. Mantra number two is oral is the new IV. We want to use oral therapy when we can. It gets patients out of the hospital. They don't have this catheter, and it's been shown in many cases to be as effective, even for serious infections like osteomyelitis, osteomyelitis, even patients febrile neutrophinia, even there's a study in endocarditis, where oral therapy has been shown to be effective. So I'm just showing you. These are meta analysis osteomyelitis. So factor favors IV will be on the left, favors oral on the right. Osteomyelitis, no difference. Bacteremia actually favored oral therapy. Endocarditis actually favored oral therapy. That's not to say oral therapy superior, but it's just to say it's associated with lower complication rates, greater patient satisfaction. So if you have oral options, it's absolutely can be considered in specific populations. Who do you not consider it in? You do not consider in a patient who's clinically unstable, whose hemodynamically unstable, whose septic if they don't have a functioning gastrointestinal tract, okay, for some of the reason, they can't reliably take the drugs by mouth, or they will not have they're not reliable person to take your therapy. Or we don't have a good option. We don't have so many antibiotics with good oral bioavailability, so when you talk about gram negative infections, we have the fluoroquinolones. That's about it. We don't have a lot of treatment options, but there are some drugs that do have excellent bioavailability, and we can switch to oral therapies and get the patient out of the hospital. The only other option is to there's some new drugs. They have very, very long half lives where you give the drugs once every two weeks. And that's also being explored as a way, for example, to treat osteomyelitis. You give the patient a shot, send them home. They come back to the day hospital two weeks later, get the second dose. Okay? Myth number three, one drug is good. Two are better. Three is even better. Combination therapy is combination therapy indicated for infections. I was taught there's certain infections you always have to use combination therapy, and there is truth to that, but there's certain combinations that have never been shown to be more effective for certain types of pathogens. And then there's the problem of combination therapy, more drugs, more toxicity, more side effects. Okay, we always talk about this idea of synergy. If you have one drug plus another drug, if they hit different targets, maybe they're going to be more potent, more bactericidal, and maybe suppress resistance. And there may be some there is some truth to that for certain types of pathogens, there's even tests that can be done in the laboratory where you test the mics of the two drugs together in what's called a checkerboard array. And what you're basically doing is you're making you can see the fraction we as we go from the bottom left hand corner up to the top, this is the MI, the concentration of drug B increasing. This is the concentration of drug A. So in this well, we have no this is the control zero of both drugs in this well, we have point 06, of drug A and Point 06, of drug B. We go up here we have point 025, of drug A, and point two, five of drug B, etc. So if the mics of one or both drugs change, this could be indicative of synergy, but this test is almost never done in the laboratory.

Russell Lewis  50:33  
Sometimes the laboratory will drop discs next to each other and say, Oh yeah, there's an increased zone of inhibition, but they almost never test for synergy. And the way we calculate synergy is we say the fractional inhibitory concentration of drug A plus B, and if it's less than 0.5 it's a synergistic combination. But very little data, if any, that shows this test predicts anything happens in patients or anything with antibiotic therapy. So that's problem number one, but there are some situations where combination therapy is indicated. What if you're dealing with a problem with spectrum, you're in a site where there's problems with resistance, maybe you're treating patient with community acquired pneumonia, and I'm worried that streptococcus pneumonia and potentially an atypical pathogen like mycoplasma pneumonia or Legionella. In order to cover both pathogens, I need to use a beta lactam and a macrolide, for example. Okay, so that's adding a spectrum, or maybe I'm in an ICU that has a big problem with resistance. So using one drug to treat Pseudomonas or Acinetobacter is a little bit borderline, using two drugs might provide better coverage. And there are definitely clinical scenarios where it's absolutely essential to use combination therapy preventing the emergence of resistance. In specific clinical scenarios, the most important, the two most important, are tuberculosis and viral infections. So tuberculosis, you have this slowly growing, non replicating, or low replicating, persister cells in cavities that can achieve very high bacterial densities. And usually it's spontaneous mutations in the bacteria that lead to resistance. So by giving 234, drug regimens, you reduce the probability of a single spontaneous mutation leading to resistance. That's a very specific scenario. Now, saying that that's how Pseudomonas behaves is incorrect. Saying that's how Staph aureus behaves is not necessarily correct. Okay, different clinical scenario. The other scenario is hepatitis C and HIV, because resistance converts the disease from treatable or curable disease to a fatal illness. So we use combination therapy to reduce the risk of resistance. So we do know that for many slow growing pathogens like tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterial disease. This is an issue combination therapy may be beneficial. Another area, though, where it may be beneficial is bone and joint infections, because once again, you have this biofilm, you have this slowly growing persister cells, and the beta lactam by itself may not penetrate may not kill the zombie bacteria. So adding a second drug that does penetrate biofilm and inhibits even bacteria in the zombie state could be effective, and that drug is actually rifampin, where the regimen has been shown to be most effective for treating prosthetic infections, is a fluoroquinolon plus rifampin, okay, not in randomized clinical trials, but lots of observational data, so that's sort of our drug of choice. The problem is, once again, rifampin, lots of drug interactions. Patients are on anticoagulants. They're gonna mess up their coagulation therapy. It's also a drug that's kind of hard to use. It can be hard on the liver and cause other problems. The other situation where combination therapy is, I think we can say it's pretty well established, is exotoxin producing infections such as necrotizing fasciitis. So if you have a Clostridium infection or streptococci that are extremely aggressive and destructive because of the production of these toxins. It's been shown that the if we're treating with a beta lactam or a penicillin, that the addition of clindamycin or linasin, which are protein synthesis inhibitors, will inhibit the synthesis of these toxins. It terminates protein synthesis, shutting down toxin production to bacteria, and this has been associated with improved survival, only proven in retrospective studies, not clinical studies. Okay, so those are the situations where it's been shown to be beneficial. One other situation, infections caused by fungi, eukaryotes, fungi, and parasites, cryptococcal meningitis, we'll talk about fungal infections later. Combination therapy is established as more effective, protozoal infections, nematode infections, neurocytosis. These are different types of pathogens. Combination therapy has been shown to be more beneficial than single therapy. There's not as much evidence, though, for using combination therapy two active agents for acute pyogenic bacterial infections, the organisms are growing more rapidly. They respond faster to single drugs. So really, the pharmacology and killing activity generally of single agent therapy is good. One of the classic arguments is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, because it developed resistance. Always use combination therapy for pseudomonas, always use combination usually an aminoglycoside plus A Beta lactase, and that's the standard of care in many hospitals. Problem is it's never been shown to be more effective. Now, in the past, I'm talking like the 1960s 1970s when we didn't have good anti Pseudomonas agents, it sort of made more sense. But now we have drugs that are more potent against pseudomonas, so it's been hard to show any benefit at all. In fact, you can almost argue some more harm, because the aminoglycoside is nephrotoxic, damages the kids and also ototoxin. So the approach that many people will use, if they do use combination therapy, give the aminoglycoside, for example, with piperacillin taser, back to him, but after the first two or three days, especially if the patients does not have positive blood cultures, stop the aminoglycoside and continue the beta lactam. Don't leave them on the aminoglycoside and beta lactam for weeks and weeks and let them develop toxicity. But this is something I was taught you always had to do combination. And really, the evidence is not so strong for other fungal infections besides cryptococcosis. We're going to talk about there's imperfect data. Does combination therapy prevent resistance? This is what we always argue. Let's give combination to prevent resistance. It's been shown it does in tuberculosis, HIV, hepatitis C and in the test tubes. In theory, it does work, but it's never really been shown for acute pyogenic bacterial infection to prevent resistance, and it's what we would call a Pyrex victory, because when you give two or more drugs, more problems with toxicity and potentially greater possibility for selecting multi drug resistance. So we've reached 10 o'clock. I've given you sort of a framework to think about antibiotic therapy, 10 Principles for using antimicrobials effective. Lee to think about how to use them, the process you need to think about when selecting antibiotics. When we meet next week, we're going to talk about one of the most important problems with antibiotic therapy, and that's antibiotic allergies, and how do you manage them? Because what you're going to find in your career is that people coming in the hospital, more than one quarter of patients that tell you, I can't take penicillin. I'm allergic penicillin. And the reality is, 90% of those patients are alone, and then colleagues say, Well, don't give them a penicillin, because we don't know what. When something happens, they're going to give another drug, like vancomycin or some other non penicillin drug that doesn't work as well, has more toxicity, higher side effects. So what we want to do is get patients on the best drug for them and be label it. Get that label of allergy off their chart, because once it gets put in the chart, it's very hard to get out. So we're going to talk about how you manage patients with allergies, and what are the problems with antibiotic allergies? Thank you for your patience this morning. You.

