Russell Lewis  0:00  
Point of the background. Are there any questions or anything we need to mention before we get started? I am a little weird in my browser closed. That's not good. Okay? I do my slides in computer code. I don't use PowerPoint. I don't use Keynote Google Slides, and I just do that because it's easy, because I do a lot of modeling, statistical modeling, modeling of antibiotics and things like that. So it's easier for me to write code. And now with ai, ai understands code very well, so it can help you do things very quickly. So that's why I'm presenting it out of the browser. It's not Google Slides, and it's a PDF. So if you're wondering why the format sometimes looks a little different than maybe what you might be used to, that's why I'm presenting this out of a statistical program called R so what we're going to talk about the next, first two lessons, and actually maybe even the third, because we're going to talk about allergies, is the principles of antibiotic therapy. And antibiotic therapy obviously plays an underlying role in everything that we're going to talk about in this course, and it's a very important topic in the fact that we're currently losing our class of antibiotics, obviously, these are medical miracles. You all know this. You probably know some of the history of these drugs. You know that resistance is a problem prior to the availability of antibiotics medicine, the pre antibiotic era was largely a process of prognostication. You have an infection, you may die in a week. The person died in a week, the doctor's a genius, okay, you probably won't die from this infection. The patient didn't die. Doctor's a genius, and the treatments prior to antibiotic therapy were pretty questionable. This is a prescription in Massachusetts, the United States for Spiritus fermenti, which basically, if you look at what Spiritus fermenti is, it's whiskey. So you go to the doctor with infection, the right prescription in Latin, so you don't understand what it is. They're the pharmacist, and prepare a big shot bottle of whiskey for you, and then that's what you were taking to treat your infection. Okay, here's an example of Jamaican ginger. This is for people who have dyspepsia, cholera, Morbus, which is what we would call gastroenteritis, a viral infection in most cases, sometimes bacterial, colic, cramps, flatulence. And if you look at the Jamaican ginger, 90% alcohol, it's obvious what was the effective component of this treatment, the alcohol. The dawn of antibiotic discovery. There's there's evidence that antibiotic like substances were used by the Egyptians. Egyptians grew here contaminated Streptomyces. They actually made a tetracycline antibiotic in the beer that they drank. Greeks had evidence, Chinese had evidence of antibiotics. But the first truly effective systemic antibiotics, where you're picking a dose and you're using it to treat systemic infection, were developed by Paul Ehrlich. Invented salverson, the first treatment for syphilis, very, very toxic drug. What determined how well it worked was how skilled the physician was at administering it. Okay. Otherwise you were able you might have exacerbation, lose your limb, have severe tissue damage from the drug itself. Of course, you know Alexander Fleming, discover of penicillin, although it's questionable whether he was the only person to discover penicillin and he the problem was he never was able to purify probably the people who deserve just as much, if not more, credit are fluor a chain and Heatley, who purified it and did the first clinical trials. Now many people don't know Gerhard domach, he was the inventor of sulfonamides. These were compounds that were discovered. They were studying dyes using the clothing industry, and he found a red dye that cured streptococcal disease in mice. He actually treated his daughter with the drug before it ever been tried in humans, because she developed cellulite, severe cellulitis, and they were going to cut off her arm, he treated his daughter with impure drug, saved her life, but she was red for the rest of her life. Okay, so this is when we have our first classes of antibiotics. And I think that the thing that you can't maybe appreciate we take for granted is how this dramatically, this changed the outcome of common infectious disease. Community acquired pneumonia, mortality rate, more than one in three patients died of pneumonia pre antibiotic era. Now it's less than 10% and usually these are much older patients. Nosocomial pneumonia, 30% change in mortality. Bacterial endocarditis, uniformly lethal infection, mortality reduced by 75% gram negative bacteremia, 70% mortality reduced to 10% 60% change, meningitis, okay, even cellulitis, a relatively uncomplicated infection. In many cases, 11% mortality dropped 2.5% now this is magnitudes greater than any therapeutic drug that we have, for example, for myocardial infarction, stroke, cancer, there's nothing that comes close to the power of antibiotics in medicine in terms of reversing the course of pathology. Absolutely no other drug class. And also think about, besides treating infections, what antibiotics allow us to do. They allow deeply invasive and complicated surgeries. They allow us to give aggressive chemotherapy for cancer. It's fundamental for critical care. Keep people live with lines, multiple lines, in central venous catheters, mechanical ventilation, care for premature infants, mothers with postpartum sepsis allows stem cell and organ transplantation. So without antibiotics, we can't do these procedures safely. And if resistance becomes such a huge issue, we go back 100 years in medicine. We go back to giving whiskey. Okay, so this is a major concern because of the problems with antimicrobial resistance. This is a website from the University of Oxford. It's a large current antibiotic resistance statistics, and this is just looking at global statistics. Okay, right now, 21 point 6 million deaths due to sepsis, 7.7 5 million deaths due to bacterial infections, 4.7 of these are associated with resistance, meaning maybe resistance didn't actually cause the death, but you had to use less effective antibiotics or more toxic antibiotics, because you didn't have drugs that were quite as effective and direct. Attributable mortality due to resistance, more than 1 million people dying per year. So we can look specifically at the Italian statistics, and we see that attributable deaths due to antibiotic resistant antibiotics is over 8000 nearly 8000 deaths, and this is an estimate, but it's amazing that you don't hear about this more every day about what a crisis resistance is associated with higher mortality and the high mortality rates associated with acquiring antimicrobial resistant infections. So what are the key pathogens that are associated with the highest levels of resistance? The who has classified pathogens into a critical priority list, high priority list and medium priority, the critical priority list are all gram negatives, and they are gram negative bacterial pathogens that typically acquire in hospitalized patients, usually patients who may be immunocompromised or critically ill, and they tend to emerge after multiple antimicrobial treatments. So Acinetobacter Bomani often starts out as colonization for patients on ventilator associated pneumonia, or may start out as colonization in their burn patients, and then it slowly progresses towards developing pneumonia, bloodstream infection, sepsis, often resistant to multiple antibiotics, and in some case, all antibiotics. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is another classic pathogen associated with immunocompromised patients, critically ill patients, often multi drug resistance. What has changed in the last 10 to 15 years is the enterobacterales. These are things like E coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, enterobacteria erogenes, things that are the most common cause of urinary tract infections, bloodstream infections,

Russell Lewis  9:16  
and in the past, were imminently treatable with multiple classes of antibiotics, and since the 1990s they've now developed multi drug resistance to many of our common first line antibiotics, and in the last 10 years, even resistance to some of our last line antibiotics, carbapenem resistance, enterobacterales, Klebsiella pneumonia, is a big problem in Italy, Up to 25% of isolates from the hospital are resistant to carbapenems, drugs that we previously considered to be our last line agents to treat and we would reserve only if we had nothing left. Now we're increasingly having to use these drugs as the first line therapy for an intra abdominal infection, first line therapy for a urinary tract infection, first line therapy for presumed gram negative sepsis. And so there is a huge need for new drugs. They're active against these pathogens, and some new drugs have come onto the market, but no novel drugs, nothing a completely new mechanism of action, nothing as a completely new drug class, just iterations of older drugs to improve upon the problems of the resistance. Now, some of the high priority pathogens you see more gram positives, some pathogens where there's some evidence of resistance increasing and the medium priority pathogens are ones that there are treatments and there's even vaccines for, but they're still associated with high mortality rates or large numbers of deaths because of the lack of access to these vaccines, particularly In parts like Sub Saharan Africa. So pneumococcal disease can be very severe. Generally, it's treatable, and in many of the cases will be preventable. For example, also haemophilus influenza, this was a common cause of meningitis. Was when I was undergoing my dream with the vaccine for haemophilus influenza. You almost never see Haemophilus meningitis, but it's very common to see children come in, and even if you started treatment immediately for Haemophilus very high rates blindness, deafness, persistent neurological sequela. This is much less common, but there is issues with access to vaccine. So these are the problems that we have with resistance. And just to kind of show you, or to clarify, you know you're sitting here in Italy right now. You know which country is Italy, you can see where are the rates of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus aureus, where you may not be able to use oral therapies, you have to use an intravenous antibiotic like vancomycin. There's some exceptions to what I'm saying, but may have to use an intravenous antibiotic that's never toxic, like vancomycin or daptomycin. That means you may have to keep the patient in the hospital for weeks to treat a common infection that may have been treatable with an oral therapy in the past, and you can see the rates in Italy are 25 to 50% so almost whenever you see an infection there might be Staphylococcus aureus, you almost always have to start off by thinking, is this MRSA? And start treating them as if they have MRSA, until you rule it out that it's not MRSA and you can stop those antibiotics. This is what I was talking about, the carbapenem resistant Enterobacter rallies. Look at Italy. 25 and 50% if you're in Greece, Turkey, it's even worse. I have colleagues that work in Greece. 50, 75% of their club zeal pneumonia are resistant to carbapenems, our last line antibiotics. Okay, so this is something that transformed the mortality of common gram negative if you had a bloodstream infection with club zero pneumonia, usually, the mortality rate would be between eight to 10% six to seven years ago, it climbed to about 40 to 50% in Italy because of resistance, because doctors would start their antibiotics, they usually start and it would come back, carbapenem resistant, and they had no good antibiotics, and they had to try to treat it with combinations of different drugs. This is Acinetobacter Bomani. Ooh, we're getting an even darker now, 50 to 75% upwards of 75% resistant to multi drug resistant, Acinetobacter baumannii. This is a really problematic pathogen. It's a bacteria that often becomes, can become what's called pan drug resistant, resistant to all antibiotics. Now, one of the things you might be asking is, why does Sweden and Norway have it so good? Why are the northern European countries doing better in terms of multi drug resistant bacteria? They use much less antibiotics per capita. They probably have a little bit stricter infection control. You know, I think one of the issues coming from the United States to Italy, as I see many more older hospital structures that puts patients together, for patients together in a room, sharing the same bathroom. Well, how do you transmit Pseudomonas? How do you transmit resistant E coli through the bathroom, through the sink, through the shower. So I think that there's some infection control issues. I think there's, for sure, the a, not a culture of more judicious use of antibiotics in southern Europe. And this is the it's very evident. The problem is, even if you're in Sweden or Norway or Denmark, people travel, and resistance travels. We get resistance that travels from India. We get resistance that travels from China. So this is we can't just say, well, it's not my border, so I don't have to worry about it. It's a fundamental problem for all of us. And this is what has people really worried, because resistance is not new. In fact, it predates or it emerges at the same time as antibiotics. Antibiotics have been used for billions of years by bacteria. They've been using them for billions of years as part of their competition for nutrients, ecological niche. So if I want to survive in this cave or whatever, I can produce this antibiotic in small amounts to disrupt the biochemical pathways of my competitors. That's all about antibiotics, and they would develop resistance to that. It's been shown that resistance, even to our synthetic antibiotics, we've gone into areas where humans have never been, you know, they discover a cave in Greenland or something like that. They take swabs of the environment, and they find resistance even to our synthetic antibiotics that were invented in the 1990s Okay, so resistance is never going to go away, and it's not just a problem, but it is a problem of how we use antibiotics. We make it worse. And the problem also is the antibiotics are not being developed as much as they were in the past. And you might say, Well, why is that? If resistance is a bigger problem, why aren't we developing antibiotics? Because development of antibiotics is very risky, very expensive. It requires you to do many other things that you have to do for other classes of drugs, like you have to set up surveillance, you have to do pharmacokinetic studies in children. You know, you have to develop methods for doing testing of your antibiotic. And many pharmaceutical companies have said, You know what? It's not worth it. The return on investments, investing a billion dollars to develop an antibiotic that, even if we bring to the market, even if it succeeds, makes it through the phase three trial and it comes to market, the first thing that the hospitals are going to do is say, thank you for this new antibiotic. We're going to put it on the shelf and not use it, and we're going to protect it so all, you're not going to make money in sales. You're not going to recruit your investors. So now there's very few large pharmaceutical companies that are developing new antibiotics. Most of the new antibiotics are being developed by small biotechs, and then people hope that they're bought by new by bigger companies, the few that are interested in antibiotics. So we have to change the way we fund antibiotics, some people have said, and actually, Italy has passed some measures to this extent it says it should be like Netflix. You should be paying a tax to have an antibiotic available for you if you need it in the future, even if, even if you watch the show or not, you're paying 999, a month, or 1499 a month. Or consider antibiotics like the fire extinguisher you

Russell Lewis  18:21  
hopefully don't have to use it. I hope somebody is paying to keep it working, in case we have to right so we're going to have to change our funding. We can't have it so that antibiotics have to compete on the market against GLP one inhibitors to make people skinny, or statins to treat cholesterol that patients take every day for the rest of their lives. Antibiotics? What do we say? Take it for a shorter period as possible, and don't use them if you don't have to, and keep the expensive one brand new one on the show. So companies don't want to make antibiotics anymore. So we have to figure out new ways of funding this. And this is where it starts to come to you. The problem is also doctors, because a patient comes to you upper respiratory tract infection, 90% chance it's a virus. 90% chance of virus. You do an examination, you don't see any localizing signs of symptoms that suggest that they have plaques on the throat. They have pus. It's probably a virus. But the patient comes expecting I've been sick for five days. I feel like crap. I want an antibiotic, and the doctor wants to make them feel good. Say, Well, what's the harm if I give an antibiotic for five days or seven days? Okay? And that's called the Tragedy of Commons. What's the individual harm to the patients? Possibly low. What's the individual harm to you as a doctor? Possibly low. But if millions of doctors are doing this, which we know is true, because more than 1/3 of antibiotic prescriptions in the community are inappropriate, then it creates a knock on effect, a tragedy of the commons, and this is how we get resistance. And then in the hospital, up to 50% of antibiotic prescriptions may be inappropriate, so you have to be a steward. Antibiotics are a precious resource that is basically underlying a lot of what you're going to be doing in medicine. And if you don't have antibiotics, you're not going to be able to do a lot, your ability to heal patients is going to diminish dramatically. So you need to think about using antibiotics judiciously, effectively, and not as an anxiolytic or a way to make your field self feel better when you're seeing a patient. Okay, we have to be stewards of antibiotics. And of course, there's many different situations we're going to talk about these of when you should use antibiotics and you should use antibiotics immediately, but this is sort of the key issues that I want you to think about as you go through this course of using antibiotics, the principles for effective antibiotic use. Okay, now you know that it starts with an accurate differential diagnosis. Let me ask you this from the standpoint of an infectious disease, you have a patient who comes in and you think they may have an infection. What do you think is going to be the most important component of your diagnostic approach for establishing a diagnosis? In the end, is it going to be that their medical history, the story they tell? Is it the physical exam? Is it the radiological imaging, the X ray, the CT exam, is it the fact that you sent a C reactive protein or a procalcitonin that says they have inflammation somewhere? Or is it the microbiological test, the positive culture, positive PCR, the positive serology, which is who thinks it's a two who thinks it's B, a couple who thinks it's C, nobody, no radiologist, okay, who thinks it's biomarkers, a couple who thinks it's E, microbiological, okay, that's a majority. The reality is, in infectious diseases, it's a medical history. Now. Why is that? Because even microbiological tests, while they do confirm the diagnosis, there's very few perfect microbiological tests. And if you order microbiological tests in a patient who has a low pre test probability for having that disease, you will often end up, in many cases, with false positive tests that will mislead you about the diagnosis. You will certainly make you false negative tests you wouldn't expect to be because if the patient has a low pre test probability, but you can end up chasing your tail. So that's why we don't when a patient comes into the hospital just to order the entire battery all available infectious disease diagnostic tests to try to arrive at the diagnosis earlier, because there's going to be a certain percentage of this test that are going to be positive, just by accident, the patient doesn't have any infection. And you say, well, what's the harm of that? Well, maybe one of those positive tests means the patient has to go have pronchoscopy, where an invasive diagnostic procedure or they get started on a toxic antimicrobial that they don't need. If you've ever watched the show house, you think about it, it's always a Doctor House picked up on something that's classic infectious disease. And the things that we're so interested in is, what are your current symptoms? Does it fit the eight Cardinal descriptors? When did it start? What alleviates it? We're always interested in fever. We're going to talk a lot about fever and fever patterns, especially fever of unknown origin. We're going to talk about that. What is the patient's risk factors for infection? Has the patient been in the hospital? Do they have any indwelling devices, urinary catheters, vascular catheters, prosthetic joints, cardiac devices, recent medical procedures, immunosuppression, diabetes, a big, big thing, travel or exposure history I read on the train coming here this morning. I didn't know this that they're what they're treating a patient here in Padua for malaria. How did they know the patient had malaria in the ICU? Because they just said, We just came back from Africa, travel history is important. A fever in an infant is not uncommon. Usually, virus, right? Okay, fever and infant coming back from Africa is something different. You have to consider, could this be malaria, so recent travel or exposure history, exposure to animals, insect bites, contact with ill individuals. What do you eat? Are you an adventurous eater? Do you like to eat raw things? You like to drink raw milk? Okay, that somebody comes in with gastroenteritis, for example, your sexual history, vaccination history, okay? These things are pretty clear, but they make a huge important deal because it helps guide your decision making of what diagnostic test, what radiological test, and how you should focus your physical exam. So the history is is absolutely key. In many cases, it will establish up to 80% of diagnosis. And I'll just give you an example. Let's imagine we had somebody come into the clinic with some imaging that the chief complaint was there a farmer from Sicily with worsening back pain after sitting for more than a couple of hours. And they went back and forth to doctors, and then eventually they had an MRI of the back and they said, Oh, you may have an infection. You need to go infectious diseases, because in their l4 vertebral body, they have this evidence of inflammation and septic discitis. Okay, so who gets spondylitis or infection of the spine? This is usually going to be a hematogenously spread infection, and the classic scenario in the hospital would be a patient who's at a central venous catheter or staphylococcus sepsis, staphylococcal infection, bloodstream infection, sometimes gram negatives, and you clear the bloodstream infection, and then four or five days later, they're complaining of back pain in the bed. And you say, Well, is it because you're just laying in the bed all the time, or can you get up and get out of bed? And then eventually they complain about the back pain, and you do an MRI, and you see that the infection is seeded their l4 vertebral bodies. The reason why it seeds these particular areas is this is where patients, typically, we have degeneration as a site for seeding bacteria. And in fact, the United States, this is one of the most common causes of losses missed spondylitis, treated bloodstream infection. Patient complaint of back pain, ignored it, sent them home to come back with greater destruction of her spine in your suit, because he didn't consider this diagnosis okay. So normally, somebody comes with a a MRI like this. You're thinking, well, Staph aureus, Staph epidermis, maybe it could be strep or Enterococcus, and then some Enterococcus, but these are all things that you get if you had a catheter in the hospital. So the story doesn't make sense. If there was a patient with a catheter in the hospital, I would probably try to do a biopsy right away, but then also fairly soon start vancomycin, or a drug that would cover Staph aureus. But in a patient like this, it doesn't make sense. A 34 year old farmer who's not in the hospital, what is this? So tell me, what do you do? You're a farmer. What kind of farming do you do? I'm a sheep and cattle farmer. I work in a small enterprise near Messina that produces milk and cheese.

Russell Lewis  28:04  
I developed this back pain after I had a bad case of the flu, fever, achy joints and headache. My father also has worked on the farm. Ask about the people you know, people you work with, family. Has anybody in your family been sick? No, nobody's been sick except my my father has problems with hip pain after sitting for long periods, is going to be examined by an orthopedic doctor for hip replacement, and the other three brothers and cousin who work for the farm report no illness. These are very, very telling symptoms for an infectious disease physician. When you hear you produce cheese and you work with cattle and you have spondylitis, and you're from Italy, Southern Italy. Say, could this be brucellosis? And the time of year would fit? Possibly there's a peak time for this, when they're producing milk and cheese and also when they're slaughtering goats, for example, near Easter. He's from an endemic area. But the point is, the diagnostic test and the treatments are really completely different. You start a vancomycin and do nothing. Do absolutely nothing. You'd have to order. You'd have to call a laboratory and say, I suspect this could be brucellosis. The blood cultures need to be held for several weeks, and you require special medium for growing Brucella, you may have to do a bone marrow biopsy and a culture to make the diagnosis. That's not something you do normally. For staphylococcal infection, you would order a specific PCR test. You may do serological study to see if the patient has constant, repeated exposures to Brucella and the treatment is completely different, gentamycin, doxycycline, rifampin, unconventional treatment. So the standard drugs that you would use would never cover Russells. So this is a example. The story informed everything of where you go with a diagnostic approach and where you go with the treatment approach. The reason that this is important is that when we talk about when antibiotics are usually started, you're going to do your send off your diagnostic tests. You're going to pick those diagnostic tests based on the history and the story and your physical exam plans, and you're going to maybe even have some radiology information soon, but if especially the patient's very ill, you're going to probably start antibiotics before any of those test results come back. So you're going to treat empirically. And guess when is the most critical time of treatment for an infection? The first day, first two days, that's when the inoculum is the highest, that's when patients are usually the sickest. So selecting an appropriate empiric therapy is absolutely critical. And how do you do this? You decide to pick the broadest spectrum drug therapy you have available, just to cover your ass, to make sure that you cover everything. You can do that, and in some cases, that might make sense in a very immunocompromised patient, but there's going to be a downside to that. It's going to disrupt the microbiome of the patient. There's going to be more side effects. There's going to be potential for multi drug severe, multi drug resistance even faster. So ideally you would like to have this decision making process and the history inform you about, can I start with a more narrow spectrum therapy based on the 123, top things that I think it could be causing this, or is this patient sick enough being compromised? Has whatever special risk factors that I need to think about, broadening the therapy, okay, eventually you will have Gram stain, information identification, susceptibilities, and you may, then hopefully, you can change to more definitive therapy, in many cases, narrowing your therapy, if possible, always trying to narrow your therapy to identified microbiological costs, to try to reduce this collateral damage. But the fact that we most of our antibiotic treatment is empirical, is a big problem, because we know it leads to overuse of antibiotics. Use of antibiotics in the absence of diagnosis, while essential, leads to overuse. So there's this overlap between bacterial and viral upper respiratory tract infections, but the vast majority of patients who are presenting to you only with symptoms that have been five to seven days, sinus pressure, cough and a runny nose, sore throat, these are, in vast majority cases, going to be viral infections and should not be treating with antibiotics. Yet we know, in many cases, antibiotics will begin. Clinicians frequently overestimate the risk of bacterial infection. Actually, one program I saw that was designed to reduce the use of antibiotics by clinicians was actually a mirror that was in the doctor's office, and it had the patient do their own throat exam. They shined the flashlight, the patient looked in their mouth and said, Do you see plaques in their throat? No. And then there's an explanation of streptococcal pharyngitis versus viral pharyngitis and help the patient make their diagnosis, and so they understand why antibiotics do not make sense for their sore throat at this time. Okay, so we know we all overestimate the risk of bacterial infection in the absence of a diagnosis, we want to be sure that we're covering the patient for potential infection, severe infection, but we also know that doctors frequently underestimate the risks of antibiotic therapy. If you actually look at surveys, one in five patients give an antibiotic prescription will develop an adverse event or super infection caused by resistant pathogens, or Clostridium difficile, Clostridium clostridioides, sometimes I call drug bacteria. The other thing that's important, each additional day of antibiotic therapy confers a 3% increased risk of an adverse drug effect. So if you give empiric antibiotics, and especially if you continue for prolonged periods, this risk is accumulating in patients. Now, most side effects are going to be manageable in these patients. This is a a large paper by a group that does a lot of work on adverse effects from Johns Hopkins University in us. And this is looking at what are the most common 30 day antibiotic associated adverse events in hospitalized patients. These are patients receiving systemic antibiotic therapy, as you would probably guess, gastrointestinal problems, physicians frequently underestimate. Hematological problems. Decrease in platelets, granulocytopenia with antibiotics occurring in up to 2% of patients, renal or neurologic toxicities. And of course, some drug classes are associated with much higher rates of renal injury, such as aminoglycosides, vancomycin. Okay, so antibiotics are safe, but they do carry adverse risks, and the incidence is actually higher than most clinicians appreciate. If you tell most of your colleagues who are practicing do one in five the patients start on antibiotics develop adverse effects, they would say that sounds high, but when detailed surveys are done, yes, adverse effects do occur. The other thing that you have to be aware of is this idea of, well, let's culture everything with doing just microbiological tests to establish the cause of infection, because we do a lot of cultures, and in many cases, sometimes these cultures are done in the absence of signs or symptoms of infection. And the question then becomes, are you actually sampling infected tissue, the pathophysiological process, or are you just sampling the microbiome of the patients and some of the biggest offenders of this practice? Some of the biggest problems are, for example, superficial wound swabs, somebody has a cellulitis, or somebody has something on their toe and a swab is taken. Or they just take a Q tip and they swab it and they send for microbiological identification worthless in most cases. Usually you want to arrive at a microbiological diagnosis, you have to do a deep tissue biopsy at the margins of the process. So in many cases, we know what this is going to tell you. It's probably going to be skin flora, or it'll be a mixture of flora, and it's going to have a low positive predictive value of the actual cause of infection. Urine cultures are the bane of all hospitals, especially if you take a geriatrics unit or a unit where people have in place urinary catheters. Somebody goes around as a little dipstick test. They see a positive estimates. They send the cultures for they send urine for culture. Guess what? If you have a catheter, your urine is not going to be sterile. Sterile. You're always going to have positive urine cultures. So what does that do? Your reflexively triggers an antibiotic prescription. You're the antibiotic urine culture. The bacteria may clear for the urine for a few days. You stop, the antibiotic comes immediately. Back.

Russell Lewis  37:48  
Pizza cycle, 234, times. Pretty soon you have a unit people colonize with multi drug resistant bacteria, and then if one of them has a problem, they're admitted to the ICU. They're bringing this into the ice. Okay, it's like this big iceberg. You know, where does the resistance come? A lot of times it comes from this. A lot of times it comes from inappropriate use of urine cultures. But even things like bronchial velar lavage, patient may have a finding on chest X ray, a CT, they undergo bronchiovular lavage, maybe they get a good sample. When the bronchoscope is being pulled out becomes contaminated with mouth and it says Canada in the Bal culture, and so the pulmonologist starts an antifungal to treat Canada. Guess what? Canada does not cause pneumonia, only in patients usually are candidemic, neutropenic, okay, that's a false culture, respiratory samples if the patient doesn't have symptoms, very low probability. And also, if you take, if you do not do stool samples correctly, if the patient doesn't have ongoing diarrhea. In many cases, it's not going to be effective. So there are sometimes very simple ways that you can try to stop this stupid behavior. This was done by a colleague of mine in Los Angeles who said, I'm just going to put on every nursing station. The first thing that nurses and doctors see when they sit at the nursing station is stop sending urine cultures for everything nosocomial. If cystitis doesn't cause fevers, urine from the calf is not sterile. A positive urine culture does not equal infection, unless the patient has symptoms of cystitis, okay. And by doing this, he was able to show he reduced the number of cultures. Just a simple thing, reduced the number of also inpatient and outpatient urine cultures the month the number of catheter associated urinary tract infections actually decreased over time, because sometimes, if you stop using antibiotics, you have fewer multi drug resistant pathogens causing the infection, and there's no effect on mortality. So this is an example of that stewardship trying to induce better behaviors in our colleagues and better practices of using we have diagnostic stewardship, using our diagnostics appropriately, and antibiotic stewardship as a way to reduce antimicrobial therapy. So if you want to be cheeky when you're on your rotations, maybe put something up on one of the hospital computers that tells people stop descending urinary cultures in patients who are asymptomatic. Okay. The other principle is you have to only use antibiotics when they alter a patient's course, clinical course. There are numerous examples where antibiotics are not the only answer, or they're not an answer until something else happens in the therapeutic plan, the classic example is osteomyelitis with exposed bone. You're not going to treat bone infection. If the bone is exposed, you need to have a surgical approach to close this. Maybe if the patient has superimposed cellulitis, they can have a short course of antibiotic therapy. There's no point in treating osteomyelitis and exposed bone until that's covered. Okay, the only thing you're going to do is leave that patient on antibiotics for a long time and end up with a multi drug resistant infection of the bone, which will be impossible to treat. Okay? So if you can't have the clinical course improved by antibiotics, it will be better not to start the antibiotics until the other elements of the therapeutic plan have been implemented. There are some ethical dilemmas in this area. One of the ones that always comes down to is, what about patients who are end of life? Somebody goes to in the hospice? Should you be treating infections to make the patient comfortable? We generally say yes. But to what extent do you treat infections, multi drug resistant infections in patients who are in their terminal stages? This is a big area of debate of, what are the guidelines? Obviously, it's always a patient specific decision. The other area where this comes up a lot is somebody who's non adherent with therapy, things like HIV, because if they're not going to be adherent, the risk is, if you give them therapy, they're going to potentially transform their infection into an untreatable, resistant disease that then also potentially could be spread. So there's always these ethical dilemmas that arise for when you use antimicrobial therapy if it's appropriate or not appropriate, not only based on the clinical situation, but the overall situation with patients, principle three is that you have to empirically target microbes in the differential diagnosis. Now this is obvious, right? Patient medical history, you send off your test. Now you have to start thinking about, Okay, what antibiotic do I choose that covers the most likely pathogens? And in order to do this, you need to know, unfortunately, the spectrum of antimicrobial therapy. So I always sort of ask, you know, just certainly one of the questions when I give you a case on the exam, I'm going to ask you, what therapy would you start in the patient? I'm interested to know, and it's sometimes interesting to see what people think cover, what pathogens. That's just simply a part of it. You have to know to some degree what pathogens will cover, what what antibiotics cover, what pathogens. And it's hard. I know when you're starting out, it's hard. That's why things like the Sanford guide is useful, and one of the things that Sanford guide has are these tables that are antimicrobial spectra of activity. So this is the list here of pathogens. So these are gram positive pathogens. Here's aerobic gram positive pathogens. Here's the anaerobic gram negative bacilli. And this table is showing you several different things. It's showing you the double pluses here basically represent antibiotics that have good activity, defined by susceptibility testing, but also have clinical evidence that the drugs are effective therapies. They've been studied in a clinical trial for bloodstream infections caused by E coli. They've been studied in clinical trials for osteomyelitis caused by staphylococcus Auris. So that would probably be the terms of evidence, the double plus choice, the dirty little secret though, infectious disease is most infectious disease. Trials that are done to get antibiotics onto the market are not usually necessarily the same scenarios where we will use the antibiotic. So I may have a patient with ventilator associated pneumonia, and I want to use an antibiotic that will cover Pseudomonas. Most of the antibiotics that I'm going to be considering may not have been studied for ventilated associated pneumonia or Pseudomonas. Why? Because that's a very, very high risk group. The patients have very unpredictable pharmacokinetics, so it's hard to sometimes understand the best dose so many times. The way that these drugs came onto the market is they were studied for less severe indications, urinary tract infections, uncomplicated intra abdominal infections, and so I may have to look at just activity. So the green pluses represent good in vitro activity, in microbiological activity, so you would expect it to be an effective therapy, but there may not be the clinical evidence supporting it from a phase three randomized, controlled trial. Yellow is borderline. Okay. There's either resistance issues. There may be pharmacokinetic issues sometimes, and it's something that's not going to be a reliable therapy. And red zero means obviously, don't go there. It's not going to be an effective therapy. Now, just to show you something that I think is interesting, look at E coli. This is susceptible, and this is the options to treat. Obviously, penicillins are not the drugs that we would typically use to treat E coli. These are gram positive drugs, amoxicillin, clavilanate as an option. Piperacillentase, backdam is a good option. Neuropemone, this is the carbapenem. Lots of green options here. Okay, then you have extended spectrum beta lactamase producing E coli. Wow, look how fast all the options dropped. This is because extended spectrum beta lactamases are a resistance mechanism that are spread on mobile genetic elements, plasmids. They've disseminated rapidly in the 1990s and they lead to resistance to all the cephalosporin almost all the cephalosporin classes, and often these, these isolates, are also resistant to fluoroquinolones and other drugs. So just by having an ESBL, which occurs in up to 25 30% of patients in the hospital, you're not your number available options is decreased dramatically. Now you're looking at pretty much carbapenems only,

Russell Lewis  47:26  
and then there's the KPC and MBL. These are the carbapenemase enzymes that chew up the carbapenems. And now you can see, look, we only have one or two options, and none of them are a double plus option, because it's almost impossible to do clinical trials for multi drug resistant pathogens. Pathogens, even though the resistance is common from a regulatory standpoint, we don't get drugs that are approved to treat Metallo beta lactamase producing E coli. That regulatory pathway doesn't exist. So even if the drug does have activity. Usually, the data you have for it is it was used for urinary tract infection, and now we have to figure out how to use it and dose it for a severe infection, okay, but where this is going to be useful for you is that you have potentially you can refer to this you know, the pathogens that you need to treat. You can look at your treatment options, and then you can even begin to look in at these drugs and see, well, okay, what's some of the specific information about the drug its dosing? How do I improve its activity, the way I administer it? What are the most common side effects? So you can see how powerful this reference is for helping you make decisions for treatment. Okay, obviously when, as you gain experience, you become familiar, more familiar with the drugs. You'll know what are the most common drugs used for common scenarios. But in the beginning, you know, probe yourself. Don't just assume you know the drugs. When you're reading about infectious disease or a treatment, be sure to look up the treatments and look up the drugs. And if you're not familiar with the drugs, just take a little bit of time to read over the drugs so you become begins to embed in your mind. The biggest question that we often ask is, where did you get this infection? Did it come from the community, or have you been in the hospital or in and out of the hospital? If it's from the community, it's more likely, for example, if it's a respiratory tract infection, lower respiratory tract infection, a viral infection, streptococcus pneumonia, haemophilus influenza, moroxilla, cateralis, atypical pathogens, I could treat you with amoxicillin, phygilanine, amoxicillin, plus a macrolide or therapy. No problem. If you've been in the hospital, if you've been on a respirator, I have to use, usually, intravenous therapy. And I have to ask myself, are you at risk for having espl carbapenemase? And I may have to pick a last line therapy in the beginning to treat you. So once you go into the hospital, and especially if you start to receive antibiotics, the risk of gram negatives, including multi drug resistant isolates, begins to increase. And that's when we have to think about things like pseudomonas, MRSA and the non fermenting gram negative bacilli, which were the top of that who list? Okay, so that's one of the key things, basic principles of coverage. Where was this infection acquired? Has the patient been on antibiotics recently? Have they been in and out of the hospital? And there are some special circumstances. There's always exceptions. But this is one of the key questions that you're going to have to answer. Now, if the patient is critically ill, if they come in obtunded, septic, then your time for faffing about to make a decision is much shorter. In fact, there's evidence, we know from observational trials that each hour of delay of antimicrobial therapy increases the risk of death, and so you have to get that antibiotic into that patient immediately. And also you have to make sure the subsequent dosages of the antibiotics are in this patient immediately. So this is a classic paper that everyone cites the Kumar paper, showing the survival faction decreases as the time from hypotension onset to the administration of antibiotics is increases. So you cannot leave the patient without antibiotic therapy. You may have to start with broad spectrum antimicrobial therapy immediately, so a carbapenem, first dose, second dose. Obviously you want to get blood culture before you give the antibiotic, because that's your best chance of getting a diagnosis. If you take the blood culture after antibiotics to start it, the sensitivity is going to go down, but critically ill patients, antibiotic timing is absolutely essential. But the other thing that may change how what you're thinking about is empirical therapy. Is this concept of immune suppression? Now we say immune suppression, it's a huge bucket. You all know what immunosuppressed patient is, but what types of things, what type of immune suppression? What flavor of immune suppression changes the type of pathogens, one of the key questions I'm always thinking about in the back of my mind is, Does this patient have some therapy that might affect cell mediated immunity? Because once you affect cellulose immunity, the types of drugs that you need to use changes you have more intracellular bacteria. So common peninsulins, common beta lactams are not going to work against intracellular bacteria. Obviously, tuberculosis is its own special thing. But could this be Legionella or listeria or Salmonella Typhi or my cardia, if the patient is severely immunocompromised, usually, if it's an acute presentation, it's typically more viral infection or common bacteria or intracellular bacteria. If it's a more delayed presentation, I may be thinking about, could this patient have a fungal infection, Candida, mold infections such as Aspergillus parasites. Okay, and what are the things that immunosuppress patients? Obviously advanced age patients who've had transplants. One of the biggest problems, in addition to all the variety of factors that contribute to immune suppression, are corpus steroids, because corticosteroids get used in so many different disease states, and sometimes corticosteroids are like a hidden immune suppression. So a patient with pulmonary sarcoidosis taking 10 milligrams of prednisone per day, and they come into the emergency room with community acquired pneumonia, and it's assumed, okay, diffuse, bilateral, infiltrates into the community. It's probably streptococcus pneumonia. Start the patient on Cleopatra blood culture results, and also, now the patient's oxygenation is worsening. Patient's not doing so well, they say, Oh, we better do the patient stable enough? Can we do a bronchoscopy? We get a sputum sample, and maybe the patient's not stable enough, so they maybe adjust the antibiotics, and the patient's not doing well, and then eventually the patient goes into respiratory failure. They do a bronchoscopy, and what's growing out is pneumocystis Corinne pneumonia, an infection that we would typically see in a bone marrow transplant patient or, you know, patient with advanced HIV. Okay, this was a patient who didn't fit that mold, but was receiving steroids. So corticosteroids, think of them as credit cards you often get immediate benefit from using them for patients who have inflammatory problems, but the longer you use them, especially, the more you charge, higher the dose, the bigger the bill. And the bill comes in with interest. And usually that bill is an opportunistic infection, and in many cases, that opportunistic infection may be something unusual that you wouldn't expect to see because the suppressed cell muted immunity. And if you want to read more on this concept, this was an excellent review published just recently in in the Clinical Infectious Disease by Chastain and colleagues. And it's, a published in 2023 about the immunosuppressive effects of corticosteroids, typically more than 10 milligrams per day. Is a point where we begin to be very concerned that the patient's at risk for developing opportunistic infections. Were mainly considered giving prophylaxis to prevent, for example, immunocystis drecchiai pneumonia. So this can be hidden forms of immune suppression, but there are other forms. The older you get, if you have chronic autoimmune disease, obviously, primarily, Primary Immunodeficiencies, malnutrition, chronic infections, even smoking has been associated with impaired ciliary response, etc. So these are all different forms. And what I tried to this concept we often talk about when we see patient is, are they immune suppressed? They say, well, they could be. What's their next state of immune suppression? What drugs have they received? Are there? What is what together do we need to consider that may be contributing to this patient's problems? Okay, the last thing I'm going to talk about for today is principle six, the use of pharmacokinetic dynamic principles to optimize treatment selection and dosing. It's not just enough to think about spectrum.

Russell Lewis  57:01  
You obviously have to think about, where does the drug go? Does the antibiotic get to the site of infection? Is it the best antibiotic to get to that site of infection? Because it's the other side of the coin, right? Pharmacodynamics is the spectrum of activity, the mic, the POTUS. Look at your Stanford guide. You can pick that perfect but you can't control the resistance. You can control which antibiotic you select, but you can't control whether that antibiotic, whether the bacteria, is intrinsically resistant, until you know or is acquired resistant. You can't control the inoculum. All you can do is make your best guess based on the clinical presentation and the most likely pathogens of a drug that's going to be potent it's going to have the pharmacodynamics, the pharmacokinetics, though, is different. You can control the dose. You can look at the patient, factors that affect the absorption, distribution, metabolism and clearance, to pick the dose that has the greatest probability of treatment. Now, one of the dumbest things in the world in infectious disease is we tend to give the same dose of antibiotics to all patients. That makes absolutely no sense. Obviously, we adjust for kidney function. Sometimes we adjust for liver function. Why is that? Because in the regulatory approval of antibiotics, they make them do a study in patients with chronic renal disease, patients on dialysis or chronic liver disease, but that's different from somebody who's septic and young, but they may have acute changes in their renal function and volume of distribution. So what we want to do now, what we're trying to increasingly do, is get clinicians to think about pharmacokinetics too, in addition to the drug they're selecting. And am I picking the best drug to reach the site of infection, to achieve the highest concentrations at the site of infection and have the greatest effect? And am I doing this dosing the antibiotic in a way that maximizes the activity, because some antibiotics are more concentration dependent, giving a higher dose is going to increase activity. Some are more time dependent, and understanding that difference becomes important, especially if you're treating more resistant pathogens. So I'm not going to go into a long pharmacology lecture, but I just want to highlight a couple of practical points I always think about when selecting antibiotics. Now, remember, most of what we know about how an antibiotic behaves in your body is based on sampling the blood. Antibiotic is given, there may be an absorption phase. If it's an orally absorbed drug, there's a peak concentration that occurs. Usually there's a period where the drug is distributing from the bloodstream to the tissue. Some drugs distribute rapidly in very high amounts. Some drugs stay in the bloodstream more than in tissue. So that's an important point to know. Then there's this period of metabolism or excretion, and the time that that takes, and then the minimum concentration. And we can also describe the area under the curve and measure of overall exposure of the drug based on the drug concentrations and the clearance rate. Another way to think about area under the curve is like, almost like the average exposure during the dosing interval. So one of the most important things that when I think about antibiotics and pharmacokinetics, I have to ask myself, Where is this antibiotic going to go? And that's usually determined to us or communicated to us by the drug's volume of distribution. And this is something that's estimated. We don't measure it directly, but when you give the drug, and you do this pharmacokinetic curve, you will be able to estimate the volume of distribution in liters, or liters per kilogram. And because we know the average plasma volume in adults is about three liters plus the interstitial fluid, this gets you around 1314, liters if you have an antibiotic that is usually, for example, the volume distribution is 20 liters or less, the concentration is going to be higher, probably bloodstream than in tissues. That's important if you're treating a bloodstream infection. That would be probably a better antibiotic to use if you're treating a bloodstream infection as a vomit distribution of 20 liters or less. If the volume distribution says 46 liters or 70 liters, That immediately tells you that's way more than the volume distribution of blood and most of that drug is going into tissue. Could be adipose tissue, skin, nails. Okay, those are drugs, even if the microbiology the mic says susceptible, for example, would not be a great choice for treating a bloodstream infection. Okay, so if I had a macrolide erythromycin or Clarithromycin, drugs with very high volume distribution, terrible drug that you use to treat a bloodstream infection, even if it says susceptible, you do not treat it. You do not do that because it will have higher failure rates. For sure, the bloodstream concentrations will be low. So paying attention to volume distribution is not just a thing for nerdy pharmacologists. It tells you where your drug is going, and drugs that are like doxycycline, tijucycline, rifampin, macrolides, to some degree, sulfonamides. These are drugs even if the antibiogram said susceptible, I would definitely not move towards using to treat a bloodstream infection, they may be useful have a role in treating, obviously, pneumonia or deep tissue infections, but not something I would use to treat a bloodstream infection. What would I use to treat bloodstream infection? Drugs that concentrate in the intravascular space, like beta lactams and aminoglycosides? Okay, now that these aren't mutually exclusive. Obviously, beta lactams can get into the lung. They can get into tissues, highly vascularized organs. It's not just the volume of distribution. There's lots of factors. But this is a general rule of thumb, and it's been borne out in history. I think it's been borne out in history, usually when we see drugs where they are attempted to be used for treating endocarditis, bloodstream infections, and they have high volume of distribution, they have higher failure rates, and they tend to have higher rates of resistance. The volume of distribution can change, obviously, body mass, age, sex, pregnancy, kidney disease, liver disease, even drug interactions can displace protein binding and may change the amount of drug that's available for metabolism or clearance to the kidney. So those are some of the things that when you look at drug interactions, you may see there's a pharmacokinetic change because of changes in the volume of distribution, and volume and distribution can change in critical illness. And this is a very important point that I think was under appreciated for many years. When a patient comes in hypotensive and sepsis, what's what's occurring? They're having disseminated inflammation throughout the body. You're having deposition of fibrin and fibrin clots, and they're they're having extravasation of fluid from the bloodstream into the tissue. So if you look at their volume distribution of antibiotics, it's increasing dramatically. So where a patient is non septic, you give a certain dose, it may fill the beaker halfway, and maybe that's well above the mic of the pathogen in a critically ill, septic patient. Because of this inflammation and damage to blood vessels, their beaker has gotten much bigger, and drugs that have very narrow volume of distribution, like a beta lactam, like a carbapenem, now the blood concentration is going to be much lower. So let's put this into a practical explanation based on this phenomenon. There was a study done several years ago. They said, You know what? I wonder if you went across to 6065 intensive care units across Europe and Australia, if you just went in and sampled the bloodstream of patients, Gronk antibiotics, common antibiotics like paper. So back down, carbapenem, whatever. If we just go in and sample at three times just to see what is their exposure, how much antibiotics do they have in a bunch? Is it what we expect? This wasn't done at some little community hospital. This was done at leading academic medical centers across Europe and Australia. Okay with people who have expert guidance and people who know theoretically how to dose antibiotics. And so they went in the sample hundreds of patients to answer the question, How often do we underdose patients with beta lactams in the ICU? And what they found is, if you take the minimum target, the bare minimum that we think you need to have any efficacy with the antibiotic, more than 1/3 of patients had did not meet that target. So beta lactams generally relatively safe. No one would argue you should intentionally underdose patients in the ICU, and yet you did it to more than 1/3 cases. If you pick a more aggressive target, what kind of exposure of the beta lactam do we need to not only treat the infection may prevent resistance. More than two thirds of patients did not reach that target. So you go in and sample, you find we routinely underdose. Patients were critically ill with sepsis. Now, where do you think some of our biggest resistance problems are? ICUs patients who are critically ill

Russell Lewis  1:07:02  
with sepsis, under dosing and resistance goes a little bit hand in hand. So this is really and why did we know this? Because, once again, these antibiotics came onto the market not in doing patients, not doing studies in patients with sepsis, but doing studies of patients with urinary tract infection or an intra abdominal infection. Okay, so pharmacokinetics change, and this has led to the idea that we need to individualize dosing. We need to give loading dosages to patients who are septic. Typically, you're probably taught we give loading doses for drugs that have long half lives, right? To try to get to steady state sooner. Well, maybe we also need to give loading doses for pharmacological, pharmacodynamic reasons, to fill up that container. So give a loading dose, then start the infusion immediately, fill up that container. The first dose is the most important in the septic patient, and then we look at adjusting the dosages later the maintenance dosages. So this has led to the idea that we need to have different dosing for patients who are septic. We also now are increasingly using therapeutic drug monitoring to monitor the blood levels of antibiotics in patients and individualize the dosing, because in the past it was one dose fits all. Patient came into the ICU sepsis. I'll give him one gram of meropenem every 30 minute infusion every eight hours. Okay? This patient's 50 kilos more, one gram murapinum over every eight hours, especially 40 kilograms serum creatinine. Okay, we'll reduce the dose. No, you don't reduce the first dose a patient with kidney dysfunction, first dose is to fill the tank, and in many cases, you will have problems sites of infection where you need higher dosages. Another example is ventilator associated pneumonia. Severe pneumonia is the amount of penetration into the lung is lower. This is a study that was done looking at muropinum concentrations in the serum. Look at the concentrations in the epithelial lining fluid. This is the mic of the pathogens barely surpassing the mic in the lung. So guess where some of our biggest resistance problems are in the ICU, then later associated pneumonia, under dosing, chronic underdosing, of patients in some of these severe infections. There's other anatomically privileged sites where we routinely have to use, think about using higher dosages meningitis, sometimes ocular infections. These are anatomically privileged sites where, especially in the absence of severe inflammation, but even sometimes in the presence of inflammation antibiotics, many antibiotics will not penetrate well and achieve therapeutic concentrations. And you can even have areas, for example, necrosis or parts of the inflammation and abscesses where antibiotics will not penetrate. Okay? So there are situations where we have to match the antibiotic to the site of infection. Now, sometimes it can go in our phase. It's not always against us. Sometimes you may be treating a site of infection like the biliary tree, cholecystitis, where there's antibiotics that are excreted in bile. So then the antibiotic is actually going to be concentrated in the biliary tree and achieve concentrations that far surpass the mic. So there are certain antibiotics that are good biliary drugs, good drugs for acute polycystitis that we would use preferentially over others. The other area where there's a huge advantage is urinary tract. Because many antibiotics are excreted through the urinary tract, there's a possibility to use some antibiotics, even if it says resistant on the microbiology report, because the antibiotic is concentrated and it's screened in the urine, the concentrations may be so high that that resistance doesn't matter. For example, if we look at fluoroquinolones, concentration the bloodstream, 1.6 to 2.9 concentration in the urine, 350 some beta lactams concentration, three to six, 1000 to 2250 aminoglycosides are another classic one peak concentration, four to eight or 17 to 25 concentration in the hundreds to 1000s. So we can use this knowledge to our advantage. Patient has a urinary tract infection resistant to carbapenems. Let's still try to be in class. You might be able to clear it because it concentrates in the urinary tract. Okay, so knowing the site of infection and where you're treating is important. The last thing I'm going to mention before we take a break then, is the second most important pharmacokinetic variable, and that's clearance. This is obviously the drug elimination from the body. It's affected by the patient's disease, organ function, genetics, interaction with their drugs. And of course, one of the big issues with antibiotics is that many of these drugs are going to be cleared to the kidney, so we're going to have to pay attention to that. But make no mistake, if a patient has renal dysfunction, the first dose of the antibiotic is not adjusted. That's the fill the patient up. The thing, the most important thing, is determines the first dose of the antibiotic is the volume of distribution. Clearance is what's going to determine your maintenance dosing, how frequently you give the drug, or do you give the full dose of the drug. So volume of distribution is useful for calculating an initial dose, the loading dose clearance is usual calculating maintenance dosages of antibiotics. Okay, and of course, Sanford guide has all the dosing recommendations of how you adjust for this. So for example, if we look at muropenum, you can see the classic recommendations are, for example, patient has a creatinine clearance of 50 to 90. You give the full dose 25 to 50. You reduce the dosing interval every 12 hours. Estimate creatinine clearance of 10 to 25 we give 500 milligrams every 12 hours, etc. So these are general dosing recommendations that arose from doing studies in patients who are who had chronic renal disease. Okay, and it was part of the labeling of the antibiotic. And there's many different formulas for estimating renal function. One of the most commonly used is cockroaf Galt. You have to recognize, though, this is a formula that was developed in Caucasian males with chronic renal disease, not in a patient with acute sepsis coming into the hospital or an acute infection. It's also does not take into account older age, comorbidities, drug interactions with renal tubular secretion. So you'll hear somebody say, Oh, the patient has a threatening of 0.8 we kind of know, well, that's within normal limits. That sounds fine if i said i They're 0.8 the patient weighs 40 kilos. No, that's not fine. Or if the patient has serum cracking a 0.5 or 0.4 and 0.8 A day later, that's not fine. The patient has severe renal dysfunction. Serocratnet, by itself, does not tell us renal function without the clinical context, and even if you use this formula, it's a rough estimation. And I'll just point out one last thing, that even if we use adjusted dosages for serum creatinine, once again, this was established based on patients with chronic kidney disease, but in infectious disease, particularly in acute infections, renal dysfunction is often acute, not chronic, and up to 50% of patients so what you'll often see is a patient come into the emergency room, they're severely dehydrated, have fever, hypertensive, they're sick, and blood test, they said, the same crap means 1.5 1.8 2.0 you say, oh shit, I better reduce the dose of the antibiotic. And then they start giving fluids, and then two days later, the same creatinine is 0.8 and you reduce the dose of the antibiotic by 50% the first two or three days of therapy, when the patient's kidney function immediately improve with fluids and as they stabilize. And the thing you have to remember is the changes in serum creatinine are slow. They occur later. They said using serum creatinine to dose antibiotics was like driving by only looking in your rear view mirror. So many times we sort of there's obviously always exceptions to this, and it may be an exception if you're going to use a drug that's never toxic, but in many cases, if the patient's really sick coming in, and I think it may be hypertension and associated with their dehydrated do not reduce the first couple of dosages. Those are the most important. And then we'll see look at the trend of the kidney function, if it continues to worsen. Obviously, dosages can be adjusted, but being too aggressive at reducing

Russell Lewis  1:16:21  
dosages in the first 24 hours may lead to under dosing in a substantial number of patients. So be a little bit careful, because it's in the package labeling. So people think of it as a law, and we have to do it. We have to adjust right away. And that's one of the two most common mistakes. First common mistake, reducing the dose, the first dose of the antibiotic based on renal function. The second common mistake is reducing the dose in a patient who probably has reversible renal dysfunction. Okay, obviously, if the patient had previous renal disease, then that's different. Or if the patient's going to receive a nephrotoxic drug, that's different. But renal dose reduction, the first 48 hours of therapy may unnecessarily result in under dosing of antibiotics, especially for safe antibiotics. Okay, so when we meet tomorrow, we'll pick this up by talking about a little bit about hepatic clearance. We'll talk about drug interaction screening. I'll show you some examples of how you can use software to optimize dosing of antibiotics in terms of pharma dynamics. And then we'll finish with the other principles of effective use of antibiotic therapy. You.

